News about Free Software in Cars

Familiar battles over privacy, security and (alas!) DRM will pop-up
next in the automotive space.  To date, software innovation in the
automotive arena has been slow due to conservatism motivated
by over-riding safety concerns plus the high expense and long
lifecycle of products.  Now the advent of wireless connectivity in
vehicles has dragged them into the 21st Century, where standards such
as 1991's Controller Area Network 2.0 bus protocol are showing their
age.  The CAN protocol has little security, as befits a hardwired
network optimized for robustness and low cost that is accessed only by
trusted individuals.  Wireless exploits against CAN by an academic
collaboration (http://autosec.org) show the urgent need for the
adoption of best practices exemplified by the Internet Protocol.
Unfortunately, calls instead for security-by-obscurity in vehicles are
already being voiced.

The Right to Repair movement is an example of a new natural ally for
Free Software.  Right to Repair
(http://www.righttorepair.org/about/default.aspx) "would require
automakers to provide the same service information and tools to
independent auto and maintenance shops, as well as to consumers, that
the automaker dealership service centers receive."  In Massachusetts,
the State Senate has approved the bill
(http://articles.boston.com/2012-05-19/business/31764257_1_repair-data-repair-coalition-legislation)
although the auto industry "worries that the proposed legislation
threatens intellectual property rights, and could compromise online
security of the data, putting consumers at risk."  The advent of
issues like Right to Repair presents Free Software with the
opportunity to address the concerns of a new audience of stakeholders
like auto mechanics whose level of interest in traditional desktop
software may be low.

In April, Jason Wacha of MontaVista Software and Claus-Peter Wiedemann
of Bearing Point gave an important presentation called "Motivations
and Challenges for the Use of FOSS in the Automotive Industry" at the
FSF-Europe Free Software Legal and Licensing Workshop.  The authors
argue that the GPLv3 "Requirement to deliver certificates/keys which
normally protect car infrastructure from being tampered with" prevents
use of GPLv3 in vehicles since it "has no exception for
safety-critical operations."  Might the free-software community
consider an exception to the "anti-tivoization" clause for
safety-critical devices like cars or medical devices? Could we
contemplate, for example, a governmental body managing a
certificate/key escrow?

The Defective-By-Design campaign in its 2011 "Holiday Buying Guide"
(http://www.defectivebydesign.org/holiday) called out the problems
with the MyFord Touch software created by Microsoft.  Now with the
shipment of the Chevy Volt and three new models running the "Cadillac
User
Experience"(http://www.wired.com/autopia/2012/05/2013-cadillac-xts/),
buyers have the opportunity to purchase a car that is still
locked, but at least is running a lot of familiar software
underneath, like the Linux kernel and the X11 client-server.  General
Motors' website now features a corresponding Offer of Source
(http://www.oss.gm.com/).  Ford Motor Company, meanwhile, is backing
the OpenXC Platform (http://openxcplatform.com) which "runs on a
combination of the Arduino and Android platforms", meaning support not
only for open-source software but hardware as well.  Internationally,
the 160+-member GENIVI Alliance is promoting Linux-based common
standards for cars, and is expressing an interest in "fostering a
vibrant open-source IVI community."  Here "IVI" stands for "in-vehicle
infotainment," a somewhat outdated term that has come to refer to
applications like driver-drowsiness detection and instrument-cluster
software as well as the more traditional navigation and music programs.

Government regulatory bodies are growing interested in the safety
implications of new vehicular software.  Notably, the US National
Highway Transportation Safety Agency has advocated mandatory Event
Data Recorders
(http://www.wired.com/autopia/2011/12/feds-want-to-take-your-phone-out-of-your-car/)
that raise obvious privacy concerns; has proposed an in-vehicle
mobile-phone ban
(http://www.wired.com/autopia/2011/12/feds-want-to-take-your-phone-out-of-your-car/)
that would limit device use models; and considered mandatory backup
cameras that would show video with 2 seconds of power-on
(https://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/29/business/rule-on-rearview-cameras-for-cars-is-delayed-for-review.html),
which is a real challenge for underlying operating systems.

Both opportunity and peril for free software abound in the rapidly
evolving automotive sector.  By listening carefully, with open minds,
to the very real safety and security concerns of sympathetic parties
within the industry, advocates can engage new allies and have a
positive impact on the environmentally and economically critical
transportation sector.

